docs/manual/installation.adoc, before:

== Installation

=== Cloning the Repository
Users can obtain the source code by

[source, bash]
----
git clone https://github.com/matt-frey/epic.git
----

It is however recommended to use the latest link:https://github.com/matt-frey/epic/releases[release] for production runs. EPIC contributors can also clone the repository using the SSH version
[source, bash]
----
git clone git@github.com:matt-frey/epic.git
----


=== Prerequisites
EPIC is implemented in Fortran; hence, a Fortran compiler is required. We recommend to use link:https://gcc.gnu.org/wiki/GFortran[GNU Fortran compiler]. It further depends on link:https://www.hdfgroup.org/solutions/hdf5/[HDF5] and
link:https://www.unidata.ucar.edu/software/netcdf/[NetCDF]. Scripts to install HDF5 and NetCDF are found in the
source code subdirectory `dependencies`. No guarantee can be given for a successful installation with these scripts.
Optionally, users can install Python in order to use the provided pre- and post-processing scripts. It is generally
recommended to create a separate Python virtual environment using link:https://conda.io/projects/conda/en/latest/user-guide/install/index.html[conda]. After installing conda, all necessary Python packages for EPIC can be installed
via
[source, bash]
----
$ conda config --add channels conda-forge
$ conda create --name <env> python=3.9.10 --file requirements.txt
----
where `<env>` is the name of the environment. The file `requirements.txt` is contained in the root directory of EPIC.

**Note:** In order to install the Python scripts you need to configure EPIC with `--enable-python`.

=== Configuring
In this subsection `$PREFIX` denotes the installation directory of EPIC. The basic installation is obtained by typing
[source, bash]
----
$ autoreconf --install
$ mkdir build
$ cd build
$ ../configure --prefix=$PREFIX
$ make
$ make install
----
in your terminal.

**Note:** You can add the bin directory `$PREFIX/bin` to your `$PATH` and `PYTHONPATH` environment variables with
[source, bash]
----
export PATH=$PREFIX/bin:$PATH
export PYTHONPATH=$PREFIX/bin:$PYTHONPATH
----


// ## Performance analysis
// When configuring EPIC with `--enable-scalasca`, it is built with the performance tool [Scalasca](https://www.scalasca.org/) and [Score-P](https://www.vi-hps.org/projects/score-p/). Scripts to install Scalasca and Score-P are found in the directory `dependencies`.

// ## Dependencies
// EPIC has following requirements:
// * gfortran
// * hdf5
// * NetCDF
//
// The scripts to install hdf5 and NetCDF are found in the subdirectory `dependencies`. If you do not install hdf5
// and NetCDF to the system location, configure EPIC with
// ```
// $ ../configure --prefix=$PREFIX --with-hdf5=$HDF5 --width-netcdf=$NETCDF
// ```
// where `$HDF5` and `$NETCDF` are the root directories of your hdf5 and NetCDF installation, respectively.


// ## Running
// In order to run the model, execute
// ```
// $ epic2d --config filename
// ```
// where `filename` is the configuration file. An example of a configuration file is given
// [here](examples/taylor_green.config).

Commit message:

add bootstrap and update the manual

docs/manual/installation.adoc, after:

== Installation

=== Cloning the Repository
Users can obtain the source code by

[source, bash]
----
git clone https://github.com/matt-frey/epic.git
----

It is however recommended to use the latest link:https://github.com/matt-frey/epic/releases[release] for production runs. EPIC contributors can also clone the repository using the SSH version
[source, bash]
----
git clone git@github.com:matt-frey/epic.git
----


=== Prerequisites
EPIC is implemented in Fortran; hence, a Fortran compiler is required. We recommend to use link:https://gcc.gnu.org/wiki/GFortran[GNU Fortran compiler]. It further depends on link:https://www.hdfgroup.org/solutions/hdf5/[HDF5] and
link:https://www.unidata.ucar.edu/software/netcdf/[NetCDF]. Scripts to install HDF5 and NetCDF are found in the
source code subdirectory `dependencies`. No guarantee can be given for a successful installation with these scripts.
Optionally, users can install Python in order to use the provided pre- and post-processing scripts. It is generally
recommended to create a separate Python virtual environment using link:https://conda.io/projects/conda/en/latest/user-guide/install/index.html[conda]. After installing conda, all necessary Python packages for EPIC can be installed
via
[source, bash]
----
$ conda config --add channels conda-forge
$ conda create --name <env> python=3.9.10 --file requirements.txt
----
where `<env>` is the name of the environment. The file `requirements.txt` is contained in the root directory of EPIC.

**Note:** In order to install the Python scripts you need to configure EPIC with `--enable-python`.

=== Configuring
Assuming you are in the root directory of EPIC, you must first create the configure script and all Makefiles by
calling
[source, bash]
----
$ ./bootstrap
----
in your terminal. You then create a build directory and configure EPIC
[source, bash]
----
$ mkdir build
$ cd build
$ ../configure ..
----
The most important configure options are given in <<tab_configure_options>>. You can also append the flag `--help`
to see all available options. In the following we denote with `$PREFIX` the installation directory of EPIC.

.Important configuration options.
[[tab_configure_options,Table {counter:tab-cnt}]]
[cols="1,4"]
|===
|Option                 |Description

|`--enable-3d`          |Compile EPIC 3D alongside EPIC 2D
|`--enable-debug`       |Compile in debug mode with backtrace, floating point operation checks etc.
|`--enable-diagnose`    |Enables more diagnostics and output (especially in EPIC 2D
|`--enable-dry-mode`    |Install dry model, that is no moist physics model
|`--enable-openmp`      |Compile with shared memory parallelism
|`--enable-python`      |Install Python pre- and pos-processing scripts
|`--enable-scalasca`    |Compile EPIC with performance analysis (this extremely slows down EPIC)
|`--enable-unit-tests`  |Compile unit tests
|`--enable-verbose`     |Compile in verbose mode to allow running with more output
|`--prefix=$PREFIX`     |Install directory when performing `make install`
|===



**Note:** You can add the bin directory `$PREFIX/bin` to your `$PATH` and `PYTHONPATH` environment variables with
[source, bash]
----
export PATH=$PREFIX/bin:$PATH
export PYTHONPATH=$PREFIX/bin:$PYTHONPATH
----


// ## Performance analysis
// When configuring EPIC with `--enable-scalasca`, it is built with the performance tool [Scalasca](https://www.scalasca.org/) and [Score-P](https://www.vi-hps.org/projects/score-p/). Scripts to install Scalasca and Score-P are found in the directory `dependencies`.

// ## Dependencies
// EPIC has following requirements:
// * gfortran
// * hdf5
// * NetCDF
//
// The scripts to install hdf5 and NetCDF are found in the subdirectory `dependencies`. If you do not install hdf5
// and NetCDF to the system location, configure EPIC with
// ```
// $ ../configure --prefix=$PREFIX --with-hdf5=$HDF5 --width-netcdf=$NETCDF
// ```
// where `$HDF5` and `$NETCDF` are the root directories of your hdf5 and NetCDF installation, respectively.


// ## Running
// In order to run the model, execute
// ```
// $ epic2d --config filename
// ```
// where `filename` is the configuration file. An example of a configuration file is given
// [here](examples/taylor_green.config).
